# Building React 16 (16.8) from scratch

The purpose of this project is to gain a deeper understanding on how React works internally.

Features this bare bone React version includes, in order of development:

1. `createElement` function
2. `render` function
3. Concurrent Mode
4. Fibers (VDOM building tool)
5. Render and Commit phases
6. Reconciliation
7. Support for Function components
8. Support for hooks
9. This minified version of React DOES NOT support class components

Based on an article [published by Rodrigo Pombo back in 2019](https://pomb.us/build-your-own-react/).

## Development notes

### How is JSX transpiled to JS?

Given the following JSX code:

```jsx
const element = <h1 title="foo">Hello, world!</h1>
```

What is happening in the background is that **React** is calling its `createElement` function internally:

```js
const element = React.createElement(
  "h1", // HTML tag
  { title: "foo" }, // HTML Attributes
  "Hello" // Content / Children
)
```

The `createElement` function creates an **object** from its arguments, that would look like this:

```js
const element = {
  type: "h1",
  props: {
    title: "foo",
    children: "Hello",
  },
}
```

This is, in summary, what a React element is: **an object with two properties: `type` and `props`**.

> `children` in this case is a string, but usually it is an array with more React elements (objects with `type`, `props`, and `children` as well). So React elements have a tree structure, in which there's a root element with one or more elements anidated, and this goes on _ad-infinitum_.

### Creating a custom `createElement` function

The `createElement` function creates React elements from a set of properties that define HTML nodes. This elements are objects disposed in a tree structure that makes the VDOM easier to compose.

This function accepts a `type` (HTML tag), some `props` (HTML attributes and _custom **props**_), and an array of `children`, that will be returned inside the `props` object in the result element (or empty array if none have been passed).

It has to be taken into account that sometimes `children` are primitive values, so a helper function `createTextElement` was created to be called when a `children` is not of type `object`.

> In the real world, React doesn’t wrap primitive values or create empty arrays when there are no children, but in this case it was done like this to simplify the code.

### Creating a custom React-like API that Babel can use to transpile JSX

This custom clone of React is called RReact (quite original).

**But we still want to use JSX here**. How do we tell Babel to use RReact’s `createElement` instead of the original React’s function?

We can add a comment to our code to tell Babel to use our function instead of React's one when transpiling JSX:

```jsx
/** @jsx RReact.createElement */
const element = (
  <div id="foo">
    <a>bar</a>
    <b />
  </div>
)
```

> We don't need the same comment for the `render` function. This is because the `babel/preset-react` plugin included with `react-scripts` has some default rules for transforming JSX into JS, and one of them is the "Automatic runtime" feature, which uses `React` as the default API, in order to avoid the need of explicit imports (not needed from React v17). `render` function comes from `ReactDOM`, and there's no default runtime for that API, so we can safely use ours instead.

### It works! 🤖

At this point in the commit history, the first tiny version of the project should be working fine. In order to be sure the custom RReact API is being used behind the scenes, notice that **we didn't import React/ReactDOM into our `index.js`**. Also, checking the build files generated by Webpack inside the browser tools "Sources" tab, should make clear that the functions used during the transpilation were the RReact ones.

> Notice that no `webpack` or `babel` config was added to the project, nor any related plugins. This is because the (now deprecated) `react-scripts` library has all those things built-in and pre-configured by default for running React apps with a minimal setup. There are alternatives to expose/customize the `webpack` and transpiler options, like **ejecting** or using a third-party library like `craco`. Nowadays most configurations are exposed OOB when building React apps with frameworks like `NextJS` or `Vite`.

### Concurrent mode and Fibers

The current implementation has a problem: the `render` function builds the whole tree synchronously. This means the main thread is blocked until the whole tree has been built. This is not ideal.

In order to avoid this, it is possible to divide the work into small chunks and let the browser interrupt the rendering everytime a new piece of work is finished.

For that, a `requestIdleCallback` function can be used to control a loop that builds chunks of the tree and is only called whenever the main thread is idle.

> React doesn't use a `requestIdleCallback` anymore. Now it uses the _Scheduler package_. But for this use case is conceptually the same.

**Fibers**

**Each fiber is a React element and also a _unit of work_**. The `root` element (fiber) is set as the first `nextUnitOfWork`, and then the `performUnitOfWork` function will perform the work and also find and return the next unit of work, until the tree has been built. In order to easily find the `nextUnitOfWork`, each fiber also has a link to its first child, its next sibling and its parent.

The way to find the next unit of work is the following:

- If the current fiber has any child, that will be the next unit of work.
- If not, check if the fiber has any sibling, and assign it as the next unit of work.
- If there are no children nor siblings, the fiber parent's next sibling will be the next unit of work.
- If at some point we reach the `root` fiber, it means the tree building has been completed.

### Render and Commit phases

The solution to the previous problem caused another one. Now a new node is added to the DOM each time a unit of work is finished. Since the browser can interrupt that work before the whole tree has been rendered, it can happen that the user sees an incomplete UI.

To avoid that, it is necessary to remove the code which adds the element to the DOM until a later phase (commit phase).

For that, we'll keep track of the work in progress root of the tree, and once the whole fiber tree has been built, it will be commited to the DOM in a single step.

**Reconciliation**

In order to understand what changed from previous render, we need to **keep track of the last fiber tree** and compare elements received on the current `render` function to the last fiber tree commited to the DOM.

This means we need to build fibers differently depending on whether they were part of the previous fiber tree or not, and add some `tags` to the result fibers of the current tree to mark them as "new", "updated" or "removed". Then, update the DOM accordingly.

> Updating props is more or less easy since they just need to be added as-is to the new element, but for event listeners the process is a bit more tricky, cause we need to add and remove them using the inner DOM functions `.addEventListener` and `.removeEventListener`.

### Add support for functional components

The current implementation of `createElement` does not support transpiling functions. Function components are different than elements in two ways:

- The fiber from a function component doesn't have a DOM node.
- The `children` come from running the function instead of getting them directly from the `props`.

Now that we support passing functions to the `createElement` function, the `type` property can be an HTML tag (string) or a function, so it can be executed with the `props` in order to get the `children`. The rest of the implementation remains the same.

The only other change needed is a couple of extra checks when commiting the work. Since function components doesn't have a DOM node associated, it is necessary to go up the tree an indeterminate number of levels to find the first parent fiber which has a DOM node associated. This is necessary for appending elements but also for deleting them, since it is necessary to delete the DOM node from the tree.

## TODO

Out of the scope of the article but interesting things to add in the future

- Refactor to extract logic from the `index.jsx` file
- Add support for `style` object prop
- Add `useEffect` hook
- Reconciliation by `key`
- Flatten children arrays
- Support for TypeScript

## Troubleshooting

Notes for anyone who wants to run the project (most likely myself in several months, if so).

### Starting local dev environment for newer Node versions

The libraries used in this tiny project are way outdated _even at the moment of developing it_. If you get an error `Error: error:0308010C:digital envelope routines::unsupported` while running the start command (`npm start`), run this one instead:

```bash
NODE_OPTIONS=--openssl-legacy-provider npm start
```
